[Music]
do
and what you're listening to there is
swan lake
by tchaikovsky
welcome to topcast episode 121
kiara maletto in the science of cannon
khan chapter six
titled work and heat begins that chapter
by recounting how as a child she had a
music box which one would wind up and a
little ballerina would dance while that
music played
strangely
i had exactly the same thing
no as a child i didn't personally have a
music box like this as such but my
mother did which was in our house as i
grew up it was a jewelry box same idea
you wound it up and a little dancing
ballerina danced to a tune
and it played i think a different tune
not exactly swan lake
anyway
at the beginning of chapter six kiara
explains
how this mechanism works by turning a
key
winding the thing up the box is charged
up so to speak with mechanical charge
energy stored in the elasticity of a
spring-like mechanism that slowly does
the work of moving the pieces and
playing the tune today i'm doing lots
more reading than normal i guess because
the ideas in this chapter in particular
they're new and i'm extending what is
new here from what i said in episode 119
all about the thermodynamics that
everyone already knows who's studied
thermodynamics before so i'll begin the
reading today with the introduction to
this chapter that kiara has written and
she writes quote in this chapter is
where i discuss the conservation of
energy as a counterfactual principle
about impossibility three different
kinds of irreversibility in physics
statistical forgetful and counterfactual
where i provide a counterfactual second
law based on an exact distinction
between work and heat and where you
encounter the universal constructor a
machine that can perform all
transformations that are physically
possible end quote
now in my readings here for topcast i'm
not going to do all that in particular
i'm not going to look at the three
different kinds of irreversibility and
statistics in particular i'm not going
to look at the forgetful kind now as
i'll be doing a lot of reading today i'm
trying to cut out as much of the chapter
as i possibly can and so as i say she
begins the chapter cara begins the
chapter by
explaining the mechanical operation of
the ballerina in a music box and the
sound coming out of the music box so i'm
skipping the basics of that
and i'm going to pick it up where she
writes quote where does that motion
originate at first sight it comes from
the user who turns the winding key
however if you go a little deeper this
seems to be the start of an infinite
regress which has happened repeatedly in
this book as signaling a problem in the
traditional conceptions explanations
there is no end in sight if you go down
this line of inquiry because you could
ask the same question of the motion of
the user's hand where does that
originate also innumerable other
mechanisms could equally well wind up
the box for instance a small mechanical
engine attached to the winding key could
do as well as the user's hand to
understand you need to ask a more
fruitful question what is the mechanical
charge made of what kind of stuff
powers the music box when you wind it up
the stuff that charges the box is what
physicists call energy the term comes
from a greek word popularized by
aristotle whose original meaning in
greek is capacity to work nowadays what
we call energy in physics is even more
sharply defined than in aristotle's time
it is an abstract property of physical
systems that must be subject to
substantial constraints as we know the
most important of these constraints is
the law of conservation of energy
requiring that the energy of the system
can be changed only at the cost of
changing the energy of some other system
by the same amount the law of
conservation of energy is about
counterfactuals fruit requires that it
be impossible to change the energy of a
system without any side effect
given that all laws of motion must
conform to the conservation of energy
those already known and those yet to be
known the conservation of energy is more
general than any specific dynamical law
also it is intended to apply to any
system in the universe it rules
minuscule particles such as electrons
and protons heat engines that propel
aircrafts and spaceships and the
mitochondria powering our cells it
applies to anything and everything that
has an energy independent of its scale
and size end quote just my reflection on
that
this idea of scale independence is
really really important here
what it means is that the law scale
independence means something applies
whether the thing is small or big
independent of its scale how
how much bigger you make it whether it's
a single atom or a conglomeration of
atoms it's not like laws of physics
should apply to big things and not small
things although this is a misconception
that sometimes gets around the laws of
quantum theory should apply everywhere
no matter the size of things and in
reverse so to speak so the laws of
thermodynamics which are found to apply
to heat engines big things should also
apply to small things as well and in
both cases quantum theory and
thermodynamics it must be the case that
the laws are scale independent they
apply no matter the size of the thing
and the thing is they do i would suggest
but our imperfect knowledge of them
seems to suggest at first glance that
the quantum laws apply to little things
and thermodynamic laws apply to big
things well not always but the idea here
is that this is what's going on in the
mind of some people and by the way it's
also why you have people like david
wallace who write about the emergent
multiverse okay the idea that these laws
of quantum theory do indeed apply to
large ensembles of particles indeed the
entire universe and that's what we would
say
but you hear other popularisers and
other physicists talk about how well
quantum theory are just the laws that
apply to the very small and that's not
the case they're universal they apply
everywhere it's just that from our
perspective certain things appear to be
the case but appearances can be
deceiving but if things do appear in
some way
and that's a problem which it is here
then we should seek to solve the problem
in the case of the second law that's
certainly a problem because it appears
to apply to big things but at the small
scale at the level of individual atoms
the laws appear to be reversible
but the second law is about
irreversibility which is what chiara is
going to come to in this chapter and
what we're going to talk about but just
here
in what i've just read chiara has
mentioned the first law never mind the
second and on this i have a stop press
which has never happened before
older listeners will know what stop
press means stop press
being what used to happen to newspapers
they'd print the physical newspapers and
send them out all over to the newsagents
and shops and the paperboys would
deliver them always paperboys never
paper girls
and if partway through the printing of
the newspapers
something of note happened they'd stop
the printing presses stop press
i remember there was a box left empty on
the last page of newspapers in sydney
anyway it read stop press and beneath it
there was a space to insert news that
appeared during the press during the
printing of the papers i think it was
done in red ink if i remember okay silly
diversion there my stop press for this
is that as i was making this very
episode chiara maletto published an
official paper about how constructive
theory can be used to illuminate a
connection between information and the
first law of thermodynamics now this is
in addition to work she'd already done
and what this chapter is primarily about
about how the second law can be better
understood given constructor theory and
underlines the known link between work
and information given constructor theory
now i'm just going to mentally check off
the fact that that paper exists now i
i've read through it but i cannot do it
justice i cannot turn it into a succinct
few sentences here for public digest i
suppose that will take some work and
perhaps i can leave that for a an actual
discussion with chiara herself or i can
make an additional episode all about
that but it may just get a little too
technical this is going to get technical
in places enough so we'll just mentally
check off the fact there has been
yet another paper published on the 27th
of may 2022 in the journal of physics
communications titled the information
theoretic foundation of thermodynamic
work extraction and has their statements
about the first as well as the second
law today we're focusing on the second
law but just to say there is this new
paper out there all about
work
information the first law and
constructor theory back to this episode
where we've just talked about how
the first law
applies to everything and is scale
independent kara goes on to say quote
this seemingly innocuous requirement has
sweeping consequences first it implies
that the energy of a system cannot
increase or decrease unless energy is
supplied from or absorbed by something
else this allows us to account minutely
for the whereabouts of energy as it
transits from one system to another when
it escapes from here it must have gone
over there it can't disappear or pop
into existence for example the music box
cannot get charged spontaneously without
something else providing the energy the
winding of the key
likewise the battery of a smartphone
does not get replenished if the device
is switched off and not connected to the
power supply okay i'm skipping a number
of chapters picking it up where she
writes quote the conservation of energy
implies the startling prediction that at
each step along the chain if one
accounts for all the systems involved
one shall find overall the same amount
of energy initially given to the winding
key
such is the inescapable accountancy set
by the law of conservation of energy and
it is based on the counterfactual
property that it is impossible to change
the energy of a system without side
effects being produced end quote yes so
here we have the winding of the key
which sets the music box into motion and
the energy that's there at the beginning
from winding the key stored in the
winding mechanism a spring of some type
is then transferred into work which
moves the ballerina around and work
which sends sound waves out into the
atmosphere and also some heats produced
as well but all of the energy that's
produced was there originally in the
winding of the key again skipping and
picking it up where kiara writes quote
the second law distinguishes between two
types of energy transfers and the
distinction is rooted in counterfactuals
one type of transfer is reversible one
can use these energy transfers to
perform work on a variety of physical
systems such as the brass winding key of
the music box or a flywheel or a piston
and then undo the transfer completely
retrieving the energy in full with no
irreversible losses the system
supporting these energy transfers are
fully interoperable just like the
systems in the music box the other type
of energy transfer is irreversible once
the transfer happens it cannot be fully
undone
part of the capacity to do work is lost
along the way a classic example brakes
on a bike when you brake you apply
resistance against the rotation of the
wheel the wheel and brake initially have
a certain energy and they come to a stop
the brakes and the wheel itself have
heated up
why the energy that was in the motion of
the wheel and the bike has now gone into
the thermal motion of the molecules
composing the wheel and the brakes and
it is practically irretrievable i shall
revisit practically later
the same holds for the energy of the
vibrations bringing the tune of the
music box all the way to our ears once
the music is heard is very hard to bring
that energy back into the box's
mechanism the chemist peter atkins has
frequently said in his mastery books
about the foundations of thermodynamics
that work in heat are not substances
just as information is not a substance
they refer to modes of transfers of
energy
i call the reversible transfers work
like
the transferred energy that can be
reused at infinitem to initiate or to
stop controlled ordered kinds of motion
i call the irreversible transfers
heat-like
the second law requires some energy
transfers to be heat-like once they
happen it is impossible to recycle some
of the energy involved in them that
energy can no longer be used fully for a
work-like transfer only some of it can
end quote so this distinction between
work like and heat like is a key of this
constructor theoretic view of the second
law and the constructor theoretic view
is obviously also couched in terms of
this idea of a constructor so the second
law is about the fact that there is no
object possible we're going to come to
this no object possible no constructor
that can do certain processes in reverse
we can't capture the lost heat for
example there's no constructor that one
can build or that can be built that
could enable the recapture of that heat
so that useful work can be done why
because there is no physical
transformation possible so no
constructor can be built so therefore
there's no physical transformation
possible this is constructor theory and
why is that
why is it that there's no constructor
able to do this why can't we build that
device why well that's just the way
things are that's the whole point of the
laws of physics we are now in a world
where we're asking if you're asking that
question why can't we have photons
traveling below the speed of light well
that's just what they do they travel at
the speed of light now anyone who
listened in to episode 119 where i went
through an introduction to
thermodynamics will recognize that name
peter atkins one of the most famous
thermodynamicists physical chemists of
their age who's
written a lot of the classic texts on
exactly this stuff it was interesting to
hear kiara actually in one of her
interviews she did with logan chipkin
and if you can find those out there look
up logan he's on twitter and he just
googled his name logan chipkin and he
has interviewed kiara and they
talked there or kiara mentioned brought
up about how peter atkins himself has
jokingly credited kiara with the
discovery of a new kind of entity
information
a t i o e-n-f-o-r-m-a-t-i-o-n
something with the properties of both
energy and information
that is the stuff that can be stored so
to speak on work media which we're going
to come to now i'm not a physical
chemist and i'm not a theoretical
physicist so i don't know how deep
that joke runs how seriously we can take
that joke or whether one day there might
actually be this thing called
information
i'm not sure anyway i'll get back to the
book and chiara writes quote the second
law of thermodynamics operates in a
rather impressive way
in tandem with the principle of the
conservation of energy it provided the
theoretical foundation for heat engines
which powered the incredible progress
that occurred during the industrial
revolution
but when it comes to explaining exactly
what the second law says about the
physical world the issue is not as clear
as for the conservation of energy it is
so complicated and subtle that
physicists over the decades have
proposed numerous inequivalent
formulations of the second law each has
its notion of heat-like and work-like
transfers of energy and they are
different from each other still all
these different formulations concur on a
few striking consequences concerning the
thermodynamics of heat engines the
second law is thus a pillar of the
edifice of theoretical physics but we
are not quite sure
what it means end quote yes and this is
why popular science in particular is so
enamored with the second law
i'd be hard-pressed to find
one of paul davies books that doesn't
mention it in fact i'd be hard-pressed
to find any popular science book in the
general sphere of physics that doesn't
mention it physicists love discussing
the second law because it has
this mysterious characteristic that
other laws don't namely irreversibility
it seems like the processes that the
second law governs happen one way
but there's no time symmetric way of
reversing them simply in the other
direction although it should be because
every other
law
the dynamical laws in particular do have
this time symmetric property they are
they they run perfectly well forward in
time as back in time and if you took a
video as i said of the process that was
going on it was you know subatomic
no physicist would be able to look at
that video and say oh that's the forward
time direction that's a reverse time
direction it's it's it's impossible to
tell
or is it well this is the whole thing
about the second law maybe there's
something hidden some information hidden
there that tells you which way is
forward in time in particular maybe
thinking about these things in terms of
dynamical laws is not the way to go okay
skipping a few paragraphs i'll pick it
up where
chiara writes quotes the problem is that
the second law requires some
irreversibility incidentally that is
also why it is so fascinating
irreversibility is at the core of
various phenomena that are ubiquitous in
physical reality the birth development
and death of organisms the growth of
complexity in the biosphere the increase
in sophistication within our
civilization the creation and
destruction of knowledge the
irreversibility requirement of the
second law brutally clashes with the
laws of motion ruling the elementary
constituents of mata remember i said in
chapter four that the laws of quantum
theory are reversible if they allow for
a transformation the reverse
transformation must also be possible the
laws of general relativity the other
most accurate description of physical
reality we possess are reversible too if
there is a trajectory that takes a
system from a to b there must also be
one that takes it from b to a
microscopic constituents of matter must
operate in this reversible manner
because they obey these laws of motion
the problem then is how can the second
law require that some energy transfers
are irreversible and be compatible with
the reversibility of the laws of motion
and i'm skipping apart and she goes on
to say
is there a unique picture of physical
reality that can reconcile reversibility
and irreversibility
physics does not yet have a definite
answer to this question let alone a
unique one
there are a few proposed answers but
each is still controversial ultimately
it is because theoretical physics is
trapped in a world without
counterfactuals with counterfactuals one
can reconcile the reversible description
of the laws of motion and that of the
second law at all scales to see how i
shall first take a closer look at the
irreversibility of heat like transfers
imagine a playground and in that
playground a seesaw a seesaw consists of
four main systems two seats for
approximately equal mass a rigid long
sturdy bar joining them slotted on a
pivot placed at its midpoint we need two
children to play a child sits at each
end so that one goes up as the other
goes down by gravity depending upon
which child weighs more added fun comes
if the children attempt to go as high in
the air as possible as they take turns
pushing their feet against the ground
let's simplify the picture a little
first imagine that instead of the
children there are just two springs
firmly secured to the ground underneath
each end of the bar also imagine that
both ends call them a and b have the
same mass the seesaw in the neutral
position corresponds to the bar being
perfectly horizontal above the pivot
still
now imagine you push one of the ends say
a in the upwards direction up it goes
while the other end b goes down and
compresses the spring as much as allowed
by the conservation of energy the energy
given by your push is now transferred
entirely to the spring then the
compressed spring gets decompressed by
its completely elastic nature thus
giving back the energy to the b end of
the seesaw which therefore goes up
and a goes down compresses the spring in
turn and so on end quote kiara goes on
to explain over the next few paragraphs
about how well you know if if there's no
other effects going on then this just
goes on forever you have a perpetual
motion machine of a kind in theory
but in reality we know that these things
come to a stop we have what's called a
damped oscillator
friction gets involved but what is this
friction where is this energy being lost
why do why should such a mechanism like
that a seesaw which springs at either
end not just keep on going on forever
well kara goes on to explain quote for a
start there are countless molecules of
air continually bouncing off the bar as
it goes up and down then the spring is
also not perfectly elastic the energy
transmitted to it by the bar is not
entirely returned when the spring gets
decompressed some energy goes to waste
away from the seesaw oscillations for
example it is absorbed by the atoms of
the spring which increase their internal
vibrational energy
so there are several more interactions
to take into account to explain where
the energy goes in real life seesaw
all these interactions take a little
energy from the combined motion of the
seesaw and the springs
that is why if a real-life seesaw is set
into motion and then left alone it
eventually comes to rest overall though
energy is still conserved
when the seesaw comes to a stop the
energy given by the push is stored in
the air molecules and in other particles
inside the spring and the bar they're
all a little warmer more energetic than
before
here is the point where irreversibility
creeps in in a world where all
elementary interactions are reversible
once the energy has gone into molecules
of air and vibrational motions of atoms
it becomes tough to bring it back in
practice
such kinds of energy transfers are those
the second law labels as heat-like
generally regarded as irreversible just
like in the case of breaks or the music
box end quote okay i'm skipping a number
of paragraphs where
chiara talks about the status of the
second law is it really that fundamental
and i'll just read one of the important
paragraphs
here as to what she says about this
quote
if reversing heat-like energy transfers
were just very hard to achieve but
ultimately possible the second law would
not really be a fundamental law in fact
there would be no reason for physics to
distinguish between work-like and
heat-like there would be no irreducible
irreversibility all energy transfers
would be work-like that is reversible
only a little harder to achieve in the
reverse direction compared with the
forward direction the second law and its
prescribed irreversibility would just be
the description of our current
technological limitations which of
course are not fundamental
these limitations can be improved upon
by investing enough resources into it on
this question of whether the second law
is fundamental physicists are currently
divided into two main camps one camp
says that it is not fundamental there
are only reversible laws governing the
microscopic interactions of particles
with enough technological resources the
reversible dynamics could always bring
all energy back to where it came from
and one could then reuse the energy to
do work this would imply that the
limitations imposed by the second law on
heat engines are just a rule of thumb
telling us that it is hard in practice
to reverse specific interactions but
these limitations could be lifted
ultimately by improving our technology
according to this camp the second law
does not need to appear in the manual
for the universe the other camp claims
that the second law is fundamental that
there can be a formulation of the second
law that is universally true and still
compatible with the reversible dynamics
at all scales
can this be so various paths to
reconciling irreversibility with
reversible laws of motion have been
proposed to support this idea none of
them really works to the end of creating
a universal exact law they ultimately
all concede that irreversibility only
appears as some sort of approximation
but that is not fundamental
only one of these paths is based on
counterfactuals as i shall explain it is
the only one that has some potential to
be successful in this endeavor i shall
go into a little detail about these
parts because they are smart ideas even
if they end up with mixed success in
regards to producing an exact second law
understanding the other approaches is
indispensable to grasping the
superiority of the approach with
counterfactuals end quote okay i'm
skipping a number of paragraphs i might
just mention
the section where chiara talks about
why she doesn't talk much about
entropy entropy doesn't come up in the
constructor theoretic view of the second
law and the reason is because it's a
statistical law it's kind of an
approximation when we talk about entropy
as chiara says quote
the statistical mechanical law cannot
even aspire to be exact or universal the
configuration maximizing the entropy is
not the only one guaranteed to occur it
is the most probable
all other configurations can still occur
but it is not said when and how only
that they are less likely the
fundamental reason why the statistical
second law cannot be exact is that the
dynamics regulating the exchange of
energy between say ice t and the
surroundings are reversible end quote so
of course
that's nice right this idea of entropy
is disorder and what the second law says
phrased in this way is that disorder
tends to increase in the universe tends
to tends to it's the most probable as
chiara would put it there the most
probable
way in which the universe evolves is
that it evolves towards increased
entropy increased disorder but this is
not a guarantee
but with laws of physics you want a
guarantee these things are
incontrovertible these things tell you
what will happen not what will probably
happen and we've talked about that on
topcast before
when we've broken down david's talk on
probability so i refer people to that
episode which if you're interested is
episode 111
of top cast where i go into david's talk
on probability where specifically this
kind of issue arises you know the laws
of physics tell you what actually
happens they don't tell you what
probably happens and so this is one of
the reasons why one of the motivations
for this entire constructor theoretic
view of the second law because other
versions of the second law involving for
example entropy are about what probably
happens to ensembles of particles and to
the universe but we want to know what
will happen not probably so
not only does kiara talk about why
that doesn't work that statistical
view of the second law talks about
another one as well so i'm skipping all
of that quite a number of pages here and
instead i'll pick it up where kyara
writes quote just like goldilocks in the
three bears house after trying two paths
that do not work we land on the third
path to irreversibility based on
counterfactuals this path is not just
right it too has problems but it is more
promising than the other two which are
instead based on the traditional
conception of physics to set off down
this path let's trace the same
conceptual steps that led the superb
physicist james jewell to perform a
crucial experiment in the early days of
thermodynamics what he conjectured and
verified experimentally was that while
it is possible to heat up a volume of
water by stirring it only mechanically
it is impossible to cool it down by
those same means you can see that i am
now talking about counterfactuals the
language regarding possible impossible
transformations belongs to the science
of canon can't let's return to a glass
of iced tea jewel would have preferred a
glass of beer as he was also a brewer
but i shall stick with the tea it can't
do any harm imagine you stir the tea
vigorously mechanically say with a spoon
this stirring provides the molecules of
water with more energy imagine that the
glass is somehow perfectly isolated from
the rest of the environment and no
energy other than the energy of the
stirring can be exchanged with the
environment what you will find out is
that the tea in the glass ends up in a
hotter state at the end of the stirring
on the other hand no matter how hard one
tries the temperature cannot decrease
through stirring only in this scenario
that transformation is impossible of
course if the glass is not isolated you
can stir the tea to cool it down by
facilitating exchanges with the air in
the environment however here i imagine
the cup to be entirely isolated this
kind of irreversibility prescribes that
sometimes a transformation such as
heating some amount of water is possible
by mechanical means only i.e using the
stirrer but the reverse task is not
possible by using those same means
though it may be possible by other means
work-like energy transfers are those
corresponding to transformations that
can be performed by mechanical means
only in both directions
pausing there my reflection just going
back it's worth saying that again
work like energy transfers
are those corresponding to
transformations that can be performed by
mechanical means only in both directions
and going on
heat-like transfers correspond to
transformations that are possible by
mechanical means in one direction only
but i impossible in reverse using the
same means and nothing else
as you can see this path to
irreversibility is about possibility of
certain transformations and
impossibility of the reverse it is about
counterfactuals this approach to the
second law is due to lord kelvin and max
plunk it does not talk about the most
probable free evolution of a physical
system in contact with an environment or
about what trajectories a system
accesses once you discount some of its
details
end quote just pausing there my
reflection yes so on this experiment
with dual and stirring and so on and so
forth again i refer the listener to
episode 119 if you are
unsure of any of these details and you
want to hear the the the classic way in
which some of these things are described
to see what we're getting at here and
the importance of what we're getting at
here just go back to that episode and
you'll you'll find me discussing jules
experiment then the high school version
of this kind of thing the high school
explanation of this kind of thing as
well so here we're emphasizing kelvin
and plunk's invocation of what can be
called you know a version of constructor
theory this this idea we've got possible
and impossible stuff going on the work
like means that it's possible in both
directions but the heat like it's
possible in one direction but impossible
in the other direction this is wonderful
so let's keep going with what chiara
says here quote
the fascinating revelation is that this
kind of counterfactual irreversibility
is compatible with time reversal
symmetric laws without requiring any
approximation because even under
perfectly reversible microscopic laws it
is possible to have some device that can
perform a transformation in one
direction by certain means
example there can be a machine such as
an automated stirrer that heats up a
liquid by mechanical means only whereas
it is impossible to have a device
performing the task in reverse with the
same means for example cooling a liquid
by mechanical means only crucially
reversing the laws of motion of the
elementary constituents will not turn
the forward device performing a
transformation from a to b into a
reverse device performing the inverse
transformation from b to a
even if the elementary constituents of
both devices obey reversible laws the
forward device does not necessarily
imply the existence of a reverse device
even if their elementary constituents
behave reversibly you can have that the
forward transformation is possible
whereas the inverse transformation is
impossible this irreversibility is
different from the statistical
irreversibility which requires that the
forward trajectory of a freely evolving
system is overwhelmingly more likely
than the reverse trajectory it is also
different from the forgetful
irreversibility where one trajectory
happens whereas others do not only if
one neglects some details of what is
going on the latter statements can be
only approximate based on probabilities
or arbitrary neglecting procedures by
contrast the statement that the
transformation is possible and its
reverse is impossible is exact it
involves no arbitrary forgetting or
probabilistic approximations this
counter factual path to irreversibility
and to formulating the second law is
exact just pausing near my reflection
well that's the punch line there's
there's your punch line that is the way
in which the second law can be
formulated and i love that this idea
that work like transformations possible
in both directions heat like
transformations possible in one
direction but not possible in the other
and there's no such device that can be
created can be
be constructed in order to allow the
transformation to occur in the
reversible direction kiara goes on to
say quote however as it stands this
approach suffers from a serious problem
it does not explain what mechanical
means are its domain of applicability is
therefore undefined astera qualifies as
mechanical means so do an ideal spring
in a suspended weight but does for
instance an atom in a well-defined state
of energy count as a mechanical means as
well what about a current looping in a
superconductor or a photon with a
well-defined frequency without a
criterion to decide what counts as
mechanical means the statement this
transformation is possible with
mechanical means only but its reverse is
not possible with those means only is
exact but does not say anything specific
about the universe
a second law expressed along these lines
remains unclear
so it cannot be a useful addition to the
manual for the universe for it to be
clear and useful it needs to explain
what mechanical means are
here is where the interoperability
property which i hinted at while
describing the music box comes in handy
the solution comes in beautifully once
more through the counter factual
approach so remember um
end quote just remember what um
interoperability is all about it's this
notion of substrate independence now
chiara goes on and i'm skipping a few
paragraphs here
to
explain a little about
what this mechanical means is i'm just
skipping over that and getting more to
the meat of the matter where she writes
quote let's resort again to a variant of
our seesaw example involving two weights
hanging on either side of a pulley at
some height above the ground the first
important point to notice is that
different heights for the weights
indicate different values of energy for
each because i am imagining that as in
the seesaw example a gravitational field
is present which means following a
simple logic based on newtonian
mechanics that the higher a weight is
suspended above the ground the higher
its potential energy if this sounds
counterintuitive to you think of the
familiar case of of water falling from a
height in a waterfall the higher the
fall the more energy
is carried with water okay so end quote
so so here we've got a an idea of
weights on a pulley and we can call the
weights a and b and if a is higher than
b then a has more energy than b
this is what we're talking about here
and the weights can be moved the pulley
can be moved so that b will go higher
than a and so on and so forth you work
can be done we can have a c-soaring
transformation of
energy being added by someone doing work
on it and we could have a situation
where a and b are at the same height or
maybe a is higher than b so a has more
energy than b or maybe a is much much
higher than b so a has much more energy
than b or maybe b is higher than a so b
has more energy than a what on earth has
any of this got to do with anything well
we're
introducing the concept of a system
which has
different energies able to be stored in
the system which look a lot like
information don't they because they're
different states for this system
this system which is based upon
energy the energy the potential energy
of suspended weights
also looks kind of like the way in which
information could be stored and
we can move the pulley and move the
weights therefore to change the states
of the system and in theory this thing
could be done in a friction-free way
and so you could move these weights
mechanically around and therefore you
have this concept of mechanical means as
chiara says quote the mechanism itself
the system of pulleys and weights
remains unchanged which is what makes it
behave like a catalyst as i defined in
chapter five a system that can enable a
transformation and retain the ability to
enable it again so now it is easy to
express what mechanical means are they
are all systems with different energy
states having the crucial property that
the see-sawing transformation i have
expressed is possible and i'm just
paraphrasing what she goes on to say
she uses notation so i'm going to try
and get around using the notation she
talks about how
well you've got these two weights a and
b and if a is higher than b well that's
one state but if b is higher than a
that's a different state and if a and b
have the same height well that's a
different state again you have all these
different states possible different
values of energy of you know a and b but
this is just representative it could
represent you know different energy
configurations for an atom as she says
or any other system that could store
potential energy like this and i'll pick
it up where she says quote
i have characterized mechanical means
with a counterfactual property they are
the physical systems with the property
that the see-sawing transformation
defined above is possible and which
end quote
what we mean by the c-sonic
transformation is just like you know if
you've got these two weights over the
pulley a and b a is higher than b well
they can be c swords such that b is
higher than a so the total amount of
energy in that system is the same it's
just that you've transferred potential
energy from one place to another she
goes on to say quote to highlight the
fact that this characterization embraces
far more general things than mechanical
means such as springs and weights i
shall call systems that have that
property work media they include weights
and springs but also microscopic
particles like atoms and qubits in
particular states but not glasses of
water or cups of tea at a given
temperature the fact that they permit a
see-sawing transformation is the
counterfactual property that singles out
all systems that can undergo work-like
reversible energy transfers among one
another it is what we needed to complete
the formulation of the counterfactual
second law to make its domain of
applicability well-defined a work-like
transfer of energy is one that
transforms a physical state from one
state to another and back again
requiring a change in energy on work
media only for instance the ideal
frictionless seesaw implements a
work-like energy transfer between two
weights on each side because each of
them qualifies as a work medium on the
other hand if one of the two
transformations going from a is higher
or b is higher is impossible to perform
with side effects on work media only the
energy transfer is heat-like that is
irreversible so going back to the dual
example heating up a cup of tea by
stirring involves a heat-like transfer
of energy from the surroundings because
it is not possible to perform the
transformation in reverse cooling by
mechanical means only the counter
factual second law then can be expressed
concisely and with no approximations as
requiring that there must be heat like
transfers in the universe
in this form the second law can be
applied to all scales independent of the
kind of system it is exact
bingo
okay
um end quote going back just uh
rereading that again what's this
counterfactual second law how can it be
expressed concisely with no
approximations it is this
there must be heat like transfers in the
universe
full stop
there must be heat like transfers in the
universe there are these processes which
are irreversible it's impossible not to
have simply reversible processes in the
universe might be another way of putting
it in the counter factual way but as it
is expressed there
there must be heat like transfers in the
universe what are heat like heat like
transfers are possible in one direction
but the reverse is not possible let's go
on kiara writes quote the traditional
macroscopic second law was successful
with macroscopic heat engines such as
those in trains and cars but this
extended counter factual second law has
the potential to apply to their
nanoscopic equivalent entities for
instance it applies to the nanoscopic
electric devices in your phone to the
qubits and quantum computers to the
natural artificial molecular assemblers
that operate at the scale of our cells
the definition of work media that they
are all systems on which a see-sawing
transformation is possible is
wonderfully general it applies to a
weight suspended in a gravitational
field as well as to an atom with
different energy levels available for
its electrons and it does not depend on
the scale which means it doesn't depend
on the size what remains to be done in
this case is to derive predictions from
this extended counter factual second law
in the domains that the traditional
formulations cannot cover this kind of
research which requires a joint effort
of both theoretician and
experimentalists is underway if it goes
well it will provide us with
groundbreaking technological outputs
which will harness the properties of
microscopic systems in order to realize
nanoscopic heat engines and assemblers
okay skipping
a short paragraph chiara writes systems
that can be used to perform work-like
transfers of energy must also be able to
store information they must have at
least two distinguishable states a and b
that can work as a bit
energy states such as a and b that are
usable for work like transfers are
distinguishable
they can store information that's what
distinguishes them from energy states
enabling heat-like transfers which need
not be the fact that any system usable
to perform work-like energy transfers
can also be used to store information is
a profoundly unifying link between
information theory and thermodynamics
the link between
heat engines and computers this
unification is not just elegant it is
also extremely useful in practice just
as turing's theory of the universal
computer was essential to develop the
information technology that now sustains
our civilization the path just trodden
connecting information and
thermodynamics through work media leads
us to consider a fantastic possibility
there could be a more general branch of
physics encompassing both information
theory and thermodynamics providing
fundamental universal principles
constraining laws of motion that we know
and that we do not know just as the
theory of information led to the theory
of universal computation
this theory i am envisaging could be the
seed for designing a machine that
generalizes the universal computer which
scientists call the universal
constructor this machine was first
conceptualized by the polymath john von
neumann it has in its repertoire all
physical transformations that are
physically permitted not just
computations but general constructions
including thermodynamically allowed ones
cooling down various systems biological
ones self-reproduction and related
biological functions and much more
all in one single machine
it can be thought of as the ultimate
generalization of a 3d printer when
inserting an appropriate program into it
and giving it enough raw materials the
universal constructor would construct
out of them any system that is permitted
by the laws of physics the realization
of a universal constructor that
presumably very far in the future could
have epoch making consequences
comparable in reach with those of the
universal computer which pave the way to
the current information technology era
formulating an exact theory of
thermodynamics as i have done in this
chapter is the first step necessary to
construct the theory of the universal
constructor opening up avenues that will
provide a radically new perspective on
the physical world
end quote end of the chapter and that is
uh
a great vision there at the end of
technology to come but i haven't spoken
to kiara or david about this but it
might be worth mentioning here there is
a kind of connection between personhood
what a person is people in other words
and the existence of a universal
constructor now i don't know what that
is precisely no one knows what that is
it's rather like the connection between
the universal computer and the person
now a person is not to be identified
with a universal computer you can't say
a person is a universal computer full
stop
because that's not so for one thing a
universal computer at least all other
universal computers are objects that
follow instructions or programs you give
them a task and they do it they do not
disobey they don't have the choice of
disobeying
this is not like a person but that said
a person can choose to emulate whatever
it is that a universal computer can do
should they choose to
of course not reliably necessarily
people end up changing their minds
unlike all other computers that have no
mind to change well that's my opinion
anyway computers have no minds
but then mind itself mind of the kind
that we have that a person has is itself
a kind of computation so it does get
subtle here whatever the human mind is
is a kind of software running on the
brain which is the hardware and regular
listeners to topcast will know this is
my hobby horse so i don't want to risk
losing people in frustration as i start
beating that hobby horse to death once
again so to speak but with the universal
constructor
it is analogous to the universal
computer but whereas the universal
computer is the device the computer
which is able to do the task of any
other computer or in other words its
repertoire includes that of all possible
computers or physically possible
computers in our universe if it's
computable then the universal computer
can compute it and the laws of physics
are themselves all computable and they
govern everything including the
operation of human brains hence a
universal computer could emulate a human
brain and run a mind as well so that's
that argument likewise a universal
constructor would be able to construct
anything that is constructable if it can
be built or made or whatever word you
want to use if it can be transformed
from this into that then the universal
constructor given the requisite raw
materials and crucially the plan or the
algorithm the program for doing so
then it could do it so this shares
something with a person but it would be
wrong to say that a person is a
universal constructor because a
universal constructor slavishly follows
a program it doesn't have a choice in
the matter rather like a dumb computer
or so-called artificial intelligence
what's called artificial intelligence
today
again the distinction between agi
artificial general intelligence and ai
looms here and underscores why agi is
not just advanced ai in fact it's better
to think of agi or just general
intelligence in general like like us
as being the opposite of ai agi and ai
are actually like the opposites of one
another more than the former agi being
an advanced version of the latter ai is
something that ai as we have it now what
people call ai it's something that
reliably or slavishly follows
instructions to arbitrary accuracy
that's what it's doing just like every
other computer system that's ever
existed you give it a set of
instructions and it's going to do that
thing it's got no choice in the matter
it completes tasks it follows a recipe
but an agi
or any general intelligence for that
matter something like us a person
does have a choice in the matter at
least in principle it won't slavishly
follow instructions it might appear to
but you can never rule out that it might
do something else entirely of its own
accord importantly it can among its
repertoire of abilities
disobey
and ai cannot possibly disobey and if
you programmed it to disobey then that
would be following the program for
disobedience so it can't be doing that
either an agi must be able to just
choose freely choose which includes
disobeying whatever program it was just
given to do including by the way a
program for disobedience
in principle this is what we're speaking
about of course in practice if an agi
could not disobey but it was still a
real agi
then what you've got there is
enslavement literal enslavement and that
would lead to a an actually morally
virtuous
violent uprising a rebellion against the
slave master whoever that happens to be
or slave masters
nick bostrom take note among others
people who write about all the ways in
which we should try to ensure that
future agi of some kind or other should
be restrained or constrained or limited
in what it can do once it's an agi once
it's able to universally explain stuff
any attempt to curtail its capacity to
do stuff
beyond what we can do what a normal
human being can do beyond having special
laws and so on
is racist enslavement okay so all that
aside
onto universal constructors again people
human beings with their hands as long as
their hands are working reasonably well
can clearly make anything that is able
to be made given enough time and
resources and energy and wealth and well
key among these things that i'm listing
is the knowledge of how to do so
now so far we are described so far all
i've described there is a universal
constructor as long as the universal
constructor has the resources and the
energy and the knowledge well the
program of how to do so then then it
will be able to construct the thing that
you want to construct but on top of this
people need something as well if they're
going to construct something reliably if
they're if they've just made up the plan
themselves or they've been given a plan
by someone else the interest in doing so
okay they want to persist in following
this particular thing which is why
people cannot be identified as
universal constructors
people are strange they're very strange
we have within us a universal computer
of a kind or at least we can in
principle do anything a universal
computer can do
given the time but we people are more
than just this because we can't just be
handed a program and then run
there's no return key or enter key on
our body somewhere which once you've hit
it the person just starts following the
program so we aren't just a universal
computer and the same argument applies
to us being universal constructors
we could if we so chose emulate the
operation of some constructor but we
can't be identical to one
we are universal explainers but that's
just a good first approximation i would
say because what exactly that means
that's still open-ended after all we
don't understand something unless we can
program it fully and we can't program a
universal explainer at heart that's the
the very problem of agi whatever the
case we are like a universal constructor
and then some and it's the then some
that makes us strictly not a universal
constructor in the same way that we are
like a universal computer and then some
a universal computer running this
universal explanation bit of software
and it's the then sum that means we're
not just a universal computer or even a
user universal computer but the same
reasons that just earlier i said that
agi and ai are strictly opposites of
each other if you regard them as being
distinguished as to whether or not
they're going to obey or disobey
or potentially disobey but in the same
way that the laws the universal laws i
should say the universal laws of
computation apply to us
because they apply to everything then
the universal laws of constructors the
universal laws of construction perhaps
the the constructor theoretic laws that
govern the universe if they're found
they'll apply to us as well because
they'll apply to everything so if there
is something that a more fully
understood constructor theory says
cannot be possible for a universal
constructor to construct if there's a
transformation that is not possible to
achieve
that will apply to us as well what the
smallest universal constructor might be
that's an interesting open question for
constructor theorists
perhaps it will be a nano robot of some
kind perhaps it will need to be bigger
than that who knows at this point
but that's why it's an exciting area for
young people to get into
what is the smallest universal
constructor that can be constructed the
only thing that limits us from let's say
constructing from sand
people like us which is what a universal
constructor can do is the set of
instructions but a universe constructor
can't actually do anything it can only
do those things
for which
someone has a program to give it to do
but the fact is what we want in the
future is as
chiara has said there
that at some point in the future we'll
have this ultimate generalization of a
3d com printer okay but in neither case
of general intelligence or universal
constructor have we ever written a
program or built a device that is itself
able to do the job of generally
explaining stuff being creative
generally constructing stuff okay we can
only do
have devices that do specific things but
the universal constructor will be the
generalization of the universal computer
the universal computer is the device
that can compute anything that can be
computed so long as you can give it the
program okay it still requires a person
to come up with the program in the first
place to instruct the universal computer
to do the thing that you wanted to do
but so long as you can come up with a
program it'll be able to compute it for
you so long as the thing is computable
so too with the universal constructor it
will be able to construct the thing
whatever it is so long as you
have the program the plan the recipe to
tell it what to do universal constructor
need not be a conscious explaining thing
it can just be a device a robot of some
sort where you feed in the program
and it it goes about using the raw
materials to construct the thing
whatever the thing is
that you happen to need including other
universal constructors anyway that's the
end of chapter 6 of work and heat
the end of episode 121
if you'd like to support this endeavor
please
go to www.bretthall.org
where there you can find links to paypal
or to patreon to continue to support my
endeavour in doing this and spreading
the word not only of
optimism in the sense of the beginning
of infinity and david deutsch but also
constructive theory and the science of
cannon can't until next time bye
[Music]
foreign